Add tech preview attribute recommendation (#647)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: spec/syntax.md

Examples in this section are meant to be illustrative and
might not match future requirements or usage.

During the specification's "tech preview" phase,
implementations SHOULD NOT implement functionality using function or markup options

> that might later be replaced by attributes or some other solution.

Reviewer: I think it's perhaps the other way around? We should encourage implementations to experiment with alternatives (under their namespace), and then share feedback?

What is the end goal of including this recommendation?

This includes:
- Specifying the locale of an expression or markup part that is different from the message's overall locale.
- Explicitly linking opening and closing markup parts using option values,
  such as a `startRef` on a closing markup part matching the `id` or `ref` value of an opening markup part.
- Defining a namespace of options that have no formatting runtime impact,
  and are used to communicate information to translators or translation tools.

> The above restrictions will be reviewed and removed before the end of the tech preview.

Author: I would really prefer the normative SHOULD NOT, because that's a less handwavy way to say the same as "are cautioned to avoid ...", but I could live with the more verbose note as well.

Is there a reason to leave this out, though?
> - Defining a namespace of options that have no formatting runtime impact,
>   and are used to communicate information to translators or translation tools.

> possibly using a Unicode namespace (i.e. `locale=xxx` or `u:locale=xxx`).
> Such options would be reserved for use in any and all functions or markup.
> The other mechanism would be to use the reserved "expression attribute" syntax
> for this purpose (i.e. `@locale=xxx` or `@id=foo`)
> Neither mechanism was included in this Tech Preview.
> Feedback on the preferred mechanism for managing these features
> is strongly desired.
> 
> In the meantime, function authors and other implementers are cautioned to avoid creating 
> function-specific or implementation-specific option values for this purpose.
> One workaround would be to use the implementation's namespace for these 
> features to insure later interoperability when such a mechanism is finalized 
> during the Tech Preview period.
> Specifically:
> - Avoid specifying an option for setting the locale of an expression as different from
>   that of the overall _message_ locale, or use a namespace that later maps to the final
>   mechanism.
> - Avoid specifying an option to link opening and closing markup expressions
>   such as a `startRef` on closing markup or matching `id` or `ref` values in paired

> >   markup.

Author: The intent with the current language is to direct away from overall behaviour, than any specific implementation for such behaviour. Does that not also cover your concern?

> >   markup.

Reviewer: But using function options for this will always be possible anyways. I think the note should only say: "we're still thinking about this; if you need it now and options are sufficient, please use a namespace; also, give us feedback". It should not say: "avoid doing it".

> >   markup.

Reviewer 2: @stasm We agreed to this language yesterday, but I can see what you're getting at. However, I need concrete proposals...

\`\`\`suggestion
(goes here 😸 )
\`\`\`

> > - Avoid specifying an option to link opening and closing markup expressions
> >   such as a `startRef` on closing markup or matching `id` or `ref` values in paired
> >   markup.

Reviewer: Sorry for not being more specific in my earlier comment. How about the following, for consistency with the previous bullet:

```suggestion
> - Avoid specifying an option to link opening and closing markup expressions
>   such as a `startRef` on closing markup or matching `id` or `ref` values in paired
>   markup, or use a namespace that later maps to the final mechanism.
```

> >   markup.

Author: I'm finding it hard to understand what the proposed addition means. Would this namespace be on the markup names or the options? So is this about forbidding `foo:startRef` and `foo:id` in addition to the un-namespaced options, or something else?

> >   markup.

Reviewer: It’s about recommending namespaced markup options. This is perhaps my not speaking English natively, but what I want to say is “avoid specifying… or use namespaces if you need it”. What I don’t want to say is: “avoid specifying… and avoid using…”

> > - Avoid specifying an option to link opening and closing markup expressions
> >   such as a `startRef` on closing markup or matching `id` or `ref` values in paired
> >   markup.

Reviewer 2: How about:

```suggestion
> - Avoid specifying options for the purpose of linking expressions 
>   (such as to pair opening markup to closing markup) 
>   or require that such options use an implementation-specific namespace
>   while cautioning users that such option might not be replaced or unavailable later.
```

> >   markup.

Reviewer: Yes, thank you!

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> - Avoid specifying generic options to communicate with translators and 
>   translation tooling (i.e. implementation-specific options that apply to all
>   functions.
> The above are all desirable features.
> We welcome contributions to and proposals for such features during the
> Technical Preview.

```

> Such options would be reserved for use in any and all functions or markup.
> The other mechanism would be to use the reserved "expression attribute" syntax
> for this purpose (i.e. `@locale=xxx` or `@id=foo`)
> Neither mechanism was included in this Tech Preview.
> Feedback on the preferred mechanism for managing these features
> is strongly desired.
> 
> In the meantime, function authors and other implementers are cautioned to avoid creating 
> function-specific or implementation-specific option values for this purpose.
> One workaround would be to use the implementation's namespace for these 
> features to insure later interoperability when such a mechanism is finalized 
> during the Tech Preview period.
> Specifically:
> - Avoid specifying an option for setting the locale of an expression as different from
>   that of the overall _message_ locale, or use a namespace that later maps to the final
>   mechanism.
> - Avoid specifying options for the purpose of linking placeholders
>   (such as to pair opening markup to closing markup) 
>   or require that such options use an implementation-specific namespace

> >   while cautioning users that such option might be replaced or unavailable later.

Reviewer 3: The grammar is off here, depending on what you mean.  

```
Avoid specifying options for X
or require that such options use Y 
     while cautioning users that such option Z
```
I'm guessing you mean:
```
Avoid specifying options for X
or **requiring** that such options use Y 
     while cautioning users that such **options** Z
```

Reviewer: Hah, this is exactly what I meant in my comment above: https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/647#discussion_r1494754072 :)

My position is that we should recommend that early adopters "avoid or require" — and not: "avoid specifying and avoid requiring".

What would be a good way to phrase this?

Reviewer 2: I think it should probably be:

```suggestion
> - Avoid specifying options for the purpose of linking placeholders
>   (such as to pair opening markup to closing markup).
>   If such an option is created, the implementer should use an
>   implementation-specific namespace.
>   Users and implementers are cautioned that such options might be
>   replaced with a standard mechanism in a future version.
```
